All About The Incredible Asian Art


The Asian art comprises large influences from different religions, conquerors, and cultures. Asia being the largest continent on earth includes various art forms like Chinese art, Japanese art, Nepalese art, Thai art, Korean art and so much more.

Art is a short word but has a wide and expansive interpretation. Everything we see in our daily lives from nature to photography to cultures to sculptures to creativity, it is all a form of art. The unique part is we all see the same things, but HOW we see it is different!

Every day is a new day to explore a new artwork in this beautiful world. There are so many countries, regions, and places with diversified aspects. Yet, every place speaks about itself through its art styles, including architecture, monuments, paintings and so much more.

In deed, the Asian countries are also known for their widespread culture.

So let’s gather some knowledge about the Diversified Asian Art :

 

Asian art Thailand
Gautama Buddha Painting by Royal Thai Art
 

Paintings
       In Asian countries, paintings have been the most evolved form of artwork over the centuries. Their presence is considered auspicious because of the mysteries hidden behind them.

The Buddhist art is influenced by the life of Gautama Buddha. People put paintings of Buddha in their surroundings. Moreover, the paintings are linked with peaceful vibes and good fortune. These are quite famous in Thailand.

The famous Chinese painting style is Gongbi. The word Gongbi means “meticulous”. The content of Chinese paintings mainly shows portraits and narratives. Its main feature is bright colors and particular details in the picture.

Japanese art is popular for mural paintings with figurative and geometric designs.

Korean paintings, on the other hand, are done on mulberry paper or silk. They are work of black brushwork and monochromatic tones.

Chinese Calligraphy Art
Chinese Calligraphy Art
 

Calligraphy
       Calligraphy is a writing style and is a form of visual art. It was developed in China. The style became popular and was appreciated by the traditional East Asian Culture. Also, the Chinese calligraphy also greatly influenced the Japanese and Korean calligraphy.

The technique is simple. It is done with ink brushes, ink, paper and ink stone. The work of calligraphy is influenced by the quantity of water and ink used to produce strokes on the paper.

The famous art style is used for invitations, cut stone inscriptions, graphic designs, testimonials, maps and much more written works.

south asian art
Traditional Thai Style Sculptures of Garudas in Buddhist Temple
 

Sculptures
       One of the magnificent aspects of Asian culture is the sculptures made by creative artists.  They mainly depict a form of religious art to illustrate the principles of Buddhism and Hinduism.

Besides, the materials traditionally used in sculptures were metal, especially bronze and more commonly terracotta, wood, gold or silver.

For example, Phra Keo and Phra Phuttha Butsavarat are the two famous sculptures carved in semi-precious stones and are placed at the Grand Palace in Bangkok, Thailand.

The Sanctuary of Truth in Pattaya Thailand
The Sanctuary of Truth in Pattaya, Thailand
 

Architecture
        The Asian countries have exquisite architecture and rich cultural fabric. Most of the architecture in Asia was influenced by ancient religions. Stretching from the Taj Mahal in India to Temples of Buddha in China to Wat Pho in Thailand, there is great diversity in ancient Asian architecture.

The Potala Palace in Tibet is a beautiful architectural structure. The palace has the record of being the highest located place in the world. It has 13 floors with 1,000 rooms, 10,000 shrines and 200,000 statues.

Himeji Castle in Japan is known for its finest architecture. The unique thing about this castle is that it has never been attacked by natural forces or man. It is the most visited place in Japan.

Even today, Asia still stands as a huge contributor to the arts. Its large range of culture and impact is true evidence of the evolution of art.

Join our social media community to get latest updates and sale promotions.