Decorative Arts in the Middle East
Overview
The Decorative Arts from the Middle East are wonderful material examples of culture.
They are both beautiful and informative, as they tell us about the people who made them
and the people who bought or commissioned them. These art forms represent a
sophisticated lifestyle because they develop(ed) along with the people. Middle Eastern
artists built upon styles from previous time periods and other regions, and developed
distinctly unique Middle Eastern artistic practices and objects, which have commonly
been imitated by other cultures. These treasures serve as both a link to the past and a
celebration of the future as many artists keep the traditions alive today. Important forms
of Decorative Arts in the Middle East include Marbling, Miniature, Pottery/Ceramic
Tiles, Illumination, Calligraphy, Embroidery and Weaving. Decorative motifs spill over
the surfaces of objects and the exquisite workmanship transforms these objects into
works of art.
Marbling
Marbling is a unique
method of creating
beautiful patterns, and
sometimes pictures, on
paper. The patterns often
look like marble and the
images are generally
floral, but it is up to the
artist to create any design
they choose! Many
people think marbling is
similar to painting with
watercolors, but in fact,
the technique is quite
different. An artist begins
with a tray of water or a
viscous solution, and then
uses a brush to flick or
tap drops of pigment or dye into the tray. Historically, the brushes were made out of
orse-hair and rose bush stems.
nto a
h
The drops of color expand into circular or oval pools of color, floating atop the water.
Next, the artist pulls a needle-like instrument through the solution to pull the colors i
marble-like pattern. The artist may then flick more drops of pigment, enhancing the
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 1
design. Next the artist takes a piece of paper, which has been treated with size, or sizing,
to protect the paper from picking up the water, and only picking up the colors. The artist
then lays the paper in the tray and gently pulls the paper off, such as in the picture on the
left. Or, the artist may choose to manipulate the pools of color, such as the tulip, or lale
(pronounced lah-lay in Turkish), in the picture on the right. These two pieces were
reated by a Turkish artist today, but working in the traditional method.
The
r know
ing to get when you pull the paper or fabric off, so each
onoprint is unique!
c
For centuries, marbling has been used for a variety of purposes. Sometimes people
choose to decorate the paper further after it has dried, with calligraphy or painting.
oldest tradition of marbling can be traced to Japan. People in Persia and India also
practiced marbling, but probably the most popular form is marbling from Turkey. In
Turkish, it is called Ebru (pronounced Ay-broo) and this tradition spread to Europe and
America. It was commonly used in bookbinding, and the first and last pages of a book
were made of marbled paper. Today many people use it as stationary for a special letter.
Artists also experiment using materials such as fabric, instead of paper. You neve
exactly what you are go
m
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2
Illumination and Miniature
 letters,
r
.
e Safavid Era in Iran, 16th & 17th c.
Illumination includes designed
borders and miniatures used to
separate texts. It is similar to the
function of graphic design or chapte
divisions in books today, but often
with much more embellishment and
symbolic importance. The production
of manuscripts and miniature painting
was very costly and time consuming
Only persons of wealth could own
such a treasure. On the right is a
picture of an illuminated Qur’an from
th Hussain A. Al-Ramadan/Saudi Aramco World/PADIA
und in
ts,
r
.
. One
s a
nd conversing, in an afternoon of leisure.
While Qur’ans do not contain representational
or figurative art, these subjects can be fo
secular illuminated manuscripts When
considering the history of miniatures, we find
evolving styles and subject matter, influenced
by commissioners of the arts, individual artis
geographic regions and time periods. In the
early 13th century, production flourished in the
Middle East, especially in Mosul, Diyarbaki
and Baghdad. In the late 13th and early 14th
centuries, the painting became very refined
while under commission of the Ilkanids in Iran
Refinement continued in the 15th century, and
reached its peak in the 16th century in Iran
historian commented “Should one want a
thousand books, they could all be produced in
Shiraz within a year.” The top image show
Persian manuscript from the 16th century.
Persian manuscripts were often painted in a
style that portrayed an idealized world. For
example, in this image, a lovely garden with
stylized trees and flowers, frames the subjects,
who are relaxing, playing musical instruments
a
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3
Persian manuscripts then inspired the Ottoma
manuscripts. However, Ottoman manusc
artists, instead of striving for a style of
idealization, tended towards accuracy, and
commonly included histories of the sultans,
military campaigns and geographic maps. Th
n
ript
e
image on the left is an Ottoman miniature.
As a whole, miniature subject matter includes almost all aspects of daily lives. Subjects
include enthroned leaders and their court, prophets, hunters, warriors, musicians, scribes
and dervishes. Events such as war conquests, hunting outings, feasts, and even hammams
(baths) are depicted. Styles vary among painters, but miniatures are commonly comprised
of brilliant colors. Sometimes the pigment was enhanced by adding gold, silver and
mother of pearl. Gold was also sprinkled atop. Miniatures are generally void of
perspective. (In drawing, perspective is a technique that represents a three-dimensional
environment onto a two-dimensional surface, similar to how the eye sees an environment.
For example, objects further away are smaller in size.) In miniatures, the plane is
typically flattened. However, in later pieces, as time progresses, elements of perspective
can be found, along with subtle shading. They all have meticulous detail and tightly
packed ornament. Each illustration is unique and individually conceived by the artist.
Ceramic Tiles / Pottery
Wendy Levine/Saudi Aramco World/PADIA
The Middle Eastern technique of
forming artwork out of clay and then
painting on it began in ancient
Mesopotamia around 3000 BC. This
recent picture depicts a man in
Bahrain forming a vessel on a
potters’ wheel. Next he will bake the
vessel before embellishing the
surface by painting it with rhythmic
and organic designs.
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 4
Jane M. Friedman/Saudi Aramco World/PADIA
In the 13th century, the art flourished
in Persia, and artists frequently
depicted garden scenes. The craft
experienced resurgence again in
Turkey in the18th century. Turks
built upon earlier styles and invented
new styles. Tiles from Iznik, Turkey
are still highly sought after today
because of their lovely blue hues and
intricate details, such as in the image
on the right.
For centuries, glazed tile panels
covered the interior and exterior
walls of mosques, churches and
palaces. This picture of the crown
prince apartment in Topkapi Place,
Turkey, shows repeated tile
formations which form patterns on
the interior walls. Highly detailed
and expertly crafted, these tiles
containing script and floral forms
saturate the walls. The multiplication
of diverse ornament and symbols
flows perfectly and seamlessly into a
balanced whole.
Traditional crafts, such as ceramics,
are a source of national pride. On the
right, an artist in Jerusalem keeps
her heritage alive by painting
ceramics with traditional motifs
today.
Jane M. Friedman/Saudi Aramco World/PADIA
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 5
Embroidery
Embroidery has been used for centuries to embellish fabrics all over the world. It is
difficult to determine where and when it originated, but we know that it was very popular
in ancient cultures throughout the Middle East. Elaborate embroidery transforms cloth
into a special and valuable material. These decorated cloths and garments signified the
value of the property, along with the wealth and status of the owner.
Makers use a needle and thread to stitch designs onto fabric. The subject matter ranges
anywhere from ornamental designs, such as floral, vegetal and geometric designs, to
stories that use animal and human figures, to rulers’ symbols, to the written word.
Threads are made from linen, silk, wool and even fine wire and gold! Traditionally
embroidery was done by hand, but today we also have “machine embroidery.”
Robert Azzi/Saudi Aramco World/PADIA
The image on the left is a caftan worn by Mehmet the Conquerer from the Ottoman
Empire in 15th century. Ottoman caftans are men’s cotton or silk cloaks, which are
buttoned down the middle and covered with rich embroidery. The embroidery is made
with gold and silver thread. The image on the right shows a woman at a fashion show in
New York City today, wearing embroidered garments created by a designer who was
born in Saudi Arabia.
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 6
Motifs
Beautiful motifs cover much Middle Eastern decorative art. Motifs are a repeated form,
image or symbol used to form a pattern. Popular interpretations believe that the use of
geometric, floral and vegetal motifs developed because traditional Islam does not endorse
representational or figurative art. In other words, instead of painting a portrait on canvas,
or carving an animal sculpture out of stone, Middle Eastern artists developed exquisite
abstract surface decorations of beautiful motifs. Another reason for the abundance of
floral and vegetal motifs could be because much of the Middle East is dry and people
enjoy investing their time and efforts in the beauty of nature and gardens. However, over
time, people have interpreted and debated the inclusion or exclusion of figural imagery in
“Islamic Arts” differently. Also, the Middle East includes people of many religions,
including Christians and Jews.
Geometric Designs
The first systematic writings on geometry were compiled by Euclid, in Alexandria,
around the beginning of the 4th century. By the end of the 8th century these manuscripts
were widely distributed among the Arab world, resulting in a soaring of Islamic interest
in repetition, symmetry, and continuous generation of pattern. Geometry provided a
method to repeat and divide patterns, and to enlarge exact replicas, regardless of scale.
Geometric constructions were imbued with symbolic, cosmological, and philosophical
significance. The geometric principle of relating parts to the whole is evident in
individual pattern designs, and also on a larger scale, because each element is considered
in relation to the entirety of the interior space, forming a balanced whole. The fluid
interlacing of shapes, the balance of positive and negative areas, and the masterful use of
color produce a detailed yet balanced whole. (Refer back to image of Topkapi Palace
ceramic tiles.)
Created by the Center for South Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 7
Arabesque
Geometric patterns, floral forms, and
sometimes even calligraphy, blend together to
form the art of the arabesque. In the
arabesque, the underlying geometric grid is
used as a formula upon which interlaced vines
and scrolls propagate. Continuous stems
regularly branch out to create new stems,
which again split off or reintegrate back into
the whole. This limitless, musical pattern
produces a field of rhythmic movement and
controlled pattern. The arabesque formula allows for an infinite recreation of the pattern.
Sometimes calligraphy is woven into the design so brilliantly that all modes (calligraphy,
scrolls, flowers, etc.) become the same form. This image shows the Arabesque with
calligraphy from the Alhambra in Spain. 